Revelation and Science
Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021) 6-22

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the
Qur’an and the Sunnah•
Tan Sri Prof Dr Mohd Kamal Hassan
Centre for Islamisation (CENTRIS), International Islamic University Malaysia, 50728 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

Abstract
The COVID19 pandemic continues to create havoc, fear and anxiety. More and more people are experiencing
serious psychological and mental health issues. Reports show increasing trends toward self-harm, self-injury
and incidents of suicide or attempted suicide in Malaysia today. With the increase in mental health issues
among Muslims, it is crucial that Muslim practitioners, psychologists, psychotherapists and counselors
explore the Islamic religious and spiritual resources from the Qur’an and the Prophetic Sunnah to find ways
and means of addressing and overcoming various problems of mental and emotional distress: depression,
anxiety, stress, paranoia, excessive fear or excessive anger. The Qur’an and Sunnah offers a treasure of
approaches, solutions and answers to several issues of mental health today, promoting physical, moral,
intellectual, emotional, social and spiritual resilience that are absent from mainstream conventional Western
psychology and psychiatry. Muslims patients should seek Islamic spiritual remedies, which would
complement the mainstream medical or counseling solutions, remembering that the latter are secular-based
with limitations and shortcomings, if not negative side-effects. The Islamic approach is holistic—but it does
not preclude proper medical or psychiatric treatment for certain symptoms or ailments. It is not limited to the
biological or social dimensions of mental distress but goes beyond. It seeks a complete and holistic solution by
understanding the underlying spiritual roots or ailments of human psychological distress or mental disorders
with the aim to bring about lasting as well as sound psychological growth of human beings, who are
essentially spiritual and moral beings created by God.
Keywords: Psychological disorder, spiritual therapy, the Qur’an, Sunnah.
Abstrak
Pandemik COVID19 terus menimbulkan kekacauan, ketakutan dan kegelisahan. Semakin ramai orang
mengalami masalah psikologi dan kesihatan mental yang serius. Laporan menunjukkan peningkatan terhadap
kecederaan diri, kecederaan diri dan insiden bunuh diri atau cubaan membunuh diri di Malaysia hari ini.
Dengan meningkatnya masalah kesihatan mental di kalangan umat Islam, adalah penting bagi para pengamal
Islam, psikologi, psikoterapis dan kaunselor untuk meneroka sumber-sumber keagamaan dan kerohanian
Islam dari al-Quran dan Sunnah Nabi untuk mencari jalan dan kaedah bagi menangani dan mengatasi pelbagai
masalah tekanan mental dan emosi: kemurungan, kegelisahan, tekanan, paranoia, ketakutan yang berlebihan
atau kemarahan yang berlebihan. Al-Qur'an dan Sunnah menawarkan banyak pendekatan, penyelesaian dan
jawapan untuk beberapa masalah kesihatan mental hari ini, yang mempromosikan ketahanan fizikal, moral,
intelektual, emosi, sosial dan rohani yang tidak ada dalam psikologi dan psikiatri Barat konvensional. Pesakit
beragama Islam harus mencari sumber kerohanian
*Corresponding author:
Islam, yang seiring dengan perubatan atau kaunseling
Tan Sri Prof Dr Mohd Kamal Hassan
aliran umum, dengan mengingat bahawa yang terakhir
Centre for Islamisation (CENTRIS), International
Islamic University Malaysia, 50728 Kuala ini berasaskan sekular dengan batasan dan
kekurangan, jika bukan kesan sampingan negatif.
Lumpur,Malaysia
Email: Mahmood. 42mkh.goldsand@gmail.com
Pendekatan Islam bersifat holistik - tetapi tidak

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

menghalangi rawatan perubatan atau psikiatri yang bersesuaian untuk gejala atau penyakit tertentu. Ia tidak
terhad kepada dimensi biologi atau sosial dari tekanan jiwa tetapi ia melampaui batas dimensi tersebut. Ia
mencari jalan penyelesaian yang holistik dengan memahami asas kerohanian atau penyakit gangguan
psikologi manusia atau gangguan mental dengan tujuan untuk mewujudkan pertumbuhan psikologi manusia
yang berkekalan dan sihat, di mana pada dasarnya adalah makhluk mempunyai kepentingan rohani dan moral
yang diciptakan oleh Tuhan.
Katakunci: Gangguan psikologi, terapi rohani, al- Qur’an dan Sunnah.

1. Introduction
With the COVID19 pandemic continuing to
create havoc, fear and anxiety throughout the
world, one can expect more and more people
will experience serious psychological and mental
health issues. This era of political chaos, social
disintegration, climate and environmental
emergencies, increase in the phenomena of
social ills and moral decadence has also
produced, through the social media, overflooding of false information, unethical thought,
immorality and filth disguised as new
knowledge.
Consequently,
contemporary
societies including Muslim societies – especially
in urban areas – are losing the traditional moral
compass. Already there are reports of increase in
trends toward self-harm or self-injury as well as
incidents of suicide or attempted suicide in
Malaysia today. With the increase in mental
health issues among Muslim students or adults, it
is
crucial
that
Muslim
practitioners,
psychologists, psychotherapists and counsellors
explore the Islamic religious and spiritual
resources from the Qur’an and the Sunnah of the
Prophet (s. a. w.) to find ways and means of
addressing and overcoming various problems of
mental and emotional distress: depression,
anxiety, stress, paranoia, excessive fear or
excessive anger. They will discover from the
Qur’an and the Sunnah approaches, solutions
and answers to several issues of mental health in
today’s world, which they would not get from
mainstream secular or conventional Western
mental health institutions or experts in
psychology and psychiatry.
Mental well-being problems, we are told,
are usually caused by big life crises, such as
serious
or
life-threatening
illnesses,
bereavement, or job-related crises arising from
imminent redundancy. We have little or no
control over such crises or emergencies, but it is

our ways or habits of responding to such critical
situations in life that will determine the state of
our mental well-being. This is where our level
of resilience, that is our ability to cope with
adverse circumstances, is crucial. For Muslim
youths and adults who are prone to suffer
problems of psychological disorder in these
turbulent times, we would advise them to
strengthen their level of physical, moral,
intellectual, emotional, social and spiritual
resilience—instead of relying or depending
solely upon secularism-based or materialismbased psychological or psychiatric solutions as
provided by Western institutions or traditions—
but by resorting to the God-given guidelines
provided in the Qur’an and the normative
traditions of the Prophet (s. a. w.).
There are many symptoms of poor mental
health such as: (i) being unable to concentrate;
feeling depressed; (ii) confused for an extended
period; (iii) having excessive fears or worries;
(iv) undergoing extreme mood changes; (v)
struggling with feelings of guilt; (vi) wanting to
withdraw from friends and activities; (vii) not
having high or normal energy level; (viii)
wanting to cause self-harm or self-injury; (ix)
having problems going to sleep not because of
insomnia; and, worst of all, (x) entertaining or
feeling like wanting to commit suicide.
The above symptoms of poor mental wellbeing could be triggered or brought about by any
or a combination of several factors such as: (i)
unemployment or losing one’s job; (ii) grave
illness or death of someone dear; (iii) childhood
abuse, neglect, or past trauma; (iv) loneliness or
social isolation or forced separation from the
family; (v) experience of discrimination,
injustice, oppression, subjugation or stigma; (vi)
severe or long-term stress; (vii) homelessness,
poor living conditions or unhealthy social
environment; and (viii) struggling with

7 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

conditions of deprivation, poverty or heavy a. How did human beings come into existence,
financial debt.
and if they have been created by God, what is
The above-mentioned symptoms of poor
the nature of this God?
mental health obviously require proper and b. What is the true nature and true identity of
effective treatments, which could be in the form
human beings?
of: (a) religio-spiritual therapy, or (b) c. What is the true purpose and meaning of
psychological or psychiatric remedies, or (c)
human beings’ existence and what is their
medication from modern or traditional medicine,
ultimate destiny?
or (d) meditation, or (e) counselling sessions, or a d. If there is life after death, what is the nature of
combination of two or more of those methods of
this life and how do human beings prepare for
treatment. Each of the above approaches has its
life in the hereafter?
strengths and limitations, but in this essay, we e. What is the highest and most authoritative
would like to focus on the spiritual approach to
source of guidance for human beings to
mental well-being as derived from the worldview
achieve wellbeing in this world and wellbeing
and teachings of the Qur’an.
in the Hereafter?
The Islamic spiritual approach and f. What are the purpose and meaning of the
method, in principle, look at human emotional,
universe, the world, the life of this transitory
psychological, social or mental issues from a
world (dunyā) and nature?
holistic perspective whereby the material, social g. What are the conceptions of true success and
and emotional problems faced by human beings
true failure, true gain and true loss, true
happiness and true misery? What are the
are understood or analysed not only from the
external perspectives but also from their
correct means of achieving true happiness and
connections with the inner dimensions of
of averting true misery and failure in the
Hereafter?
spirituality, namely the impact from the
conditions of the spiritual heart (qalb). Every h. What is the meaning of inner peace and
harmony? What is the divinely-prescribed
dimension of human life or personality has its
way or method of achieving inner peace and
own specific ways of maintaining well-being, no
harmony for the Believers?
doubt, but the foundation of each of them is the
religio-spiritual foundation of faith (īmān) in i. What are the rights, roles and responsibilities
of human beings as Allah’s servants,
Allah (s. w. t.) – The Compassionate Creator,
vicegerents, Believers and the Community of
Master and Sustainer of all that exist. Thus, by
Believers (Ummah Islāmiyyah or Ummah
maintaining sound, balanced and proper
Muḥammadiyyah) in the worldview of the
relationship with the Compassionate Creator and
Qur’an and the Sunnah?
Sustainer, as well as the normative legacy
(Sunnah) of Prophet Muḥammad (s. a. w.), the j. Who are the real adversaries or enemies of the
Believers, externally and internally?
Muslim believer (mu’min) develops the proper
perspectives, attitudes and behaviours vis-a-vis k. What is the best system of life and type of
civilisation for Believers and the Muslim
Allah (s. w. t.), Prophet Muhammad (s. a. w.),
Ummah?
religions other than Islam, the family, fellow
human beings, organisations, cultures, societies,
states, nature, life and oneself. It is important to 2. Issues of Mental- Psychological Health in Iium
realise that the correct and strong spiritual We believe that IIUM is not entirely free of cases
connection with the Living and Compassionate of depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, LGBTQ
Creator and Sustainer and His comprehensive trends, suicidal tendencies, addiction to
guidance in the Qur’an and the Sunnah provide pornography, substance abuse and drug-addiction,
Believers and human beings correct and clear self-harm, atheistic or agnostic thinking,
answers regarding fundamental questions of secularistic dualistic behaviour, paranoia,
human existence, which independent or xenophobia, and racial prejudices, among her
secularised human reason cannot provide. The immediate and extended communities. Lecturers
in psychology and psychiatry, counsellors,
questions are, such as:

8 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

academic advisors, Mahallah principals and deans
It is highly recommended that we reflect on
need to understand the different causes and
backgrounds of mental/psychological problems or and share the relevant hadiths with others, which
highlight how much Allah (s. w. t.) loves His
illnesses by:
who want to return to Him. As Muslim
1. Being objective in trying to understand the servants
real
academics, psychologists or counsellors, we
causes;
ought to remember and inform our students who
2. Being patient and non-judgemental;
3. Being hopeful and optimistic while giving are having problems of mental well-being the
well-known hadith quoted below that Allah (s.
counselling or advice or guidance;
4. Having empathy, caring and not expecting w. t.) runs to His servants while they walk to
him. Abu Dharr reported: The Messenger of
quick results or success;
5. Exercising forgiveness, but to convey the Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said,
right teachings of the Qur’an and the
“Allah Almighty says: Whoever comes with a
Sunnah
6. Being compassionate and never to give up good deed will have the reward of ten like it and
even more. Whoever comes with an evil deed will
hope and supplication to Allah (s. w. t.)
be recompensed for one evil deed like it or he
We should impart to the affected persons will be forgiven. Whoever draws close to me by
the conviction that Allah (s. w. t.) loves to save the length of a hand, I will draw close to him by
the length of an arm. Whoever draws close to me
His servants who have transgressed His limits:
the by length of an arm, I will draw close to him
“Say, o my servants who have transgressed by the length of a fathom. Whoever comes to me
against themselves [by sinning], do not despair walking, I will come to him running. Whoever
of the mercy of Allah. Indeed, Allah forgives all meets me with enough sins to fill the earth, not
sins. Indeed, it is He who is the Forgiving, the associating any idols with me, I will meet him
with as much forgiveness.”
Merciful.”
(Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim 2687)
The Qur’an (39:53)
We need, therefore, to be gentle, not hard or
To the Muslim youth and adults, including
harsh, in dealing with people having symptoms IIUM students and staff, who may be
of psychological disorder. Remember how Allah experiencing some problems of mental well(s. w. t.) reminds the Prophet (s. a. w.):
being, the present COVID-19 pandemic provides
the best justification for them to find the right
“Only through the Divine Mercy have you (O and lasting solutions to their problems of
Muhammad) been able to deal with your psychological trauma or spiritual illness – which
followers so gently. If you had been stern and are manifesting in poor state of mental wellhard-hearted, they would all have deserted you being – from what the Islamic paradigm of
a long time ago. Forgive them and ask God to psycho-spiritual well-being can offer (Hooman
forgive (their sins) and consult with them in Keshavarzi 2018). As for the cures or remedies
certain matters. But, when you reach a decision, of specific psychological or mental well-being
trust God. God loves those who trust Him.”
problems or ailments, the Islamic spiritual
The Qur’an (3:159) approach as embodied in the tradition of
taṣawwuf (science of Islamic spirituality or
We must share the Qur’anic and Sunnatic Sufism) has developed a variety of psychoprinciple that Allah (s. w. t.) loves gentleness, as spiritual preventive and therapeutic treatments,
reported by Abu Hurairah (r. a.): “The Prophet, ranging from the simplest to the most complex
peace and blessings be upon him, said, “Verily, remedies.
Allah is gentle and He loves gentleness. He
We know from the worldview of the
grants reward for gentleness what is not given Qur’an that human well-being as a whole is to be
for harshness.”
developed and nurtured through strengthening,

9 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

enriching and refining the spiritual bond (īmān) dimension of human-human and human-nature
with Allah (s. w. t.) and following what He and relationships, which come under the generic term
His human Prophets and Messengers (peace and “good/virtuous deeds” (‘amal ṣāliḥ).
Islamic scholars of spiritual sciences
blessings be upon all of them), have taught
regarding the right ways and means for human consider it a religious responsibility of every
beings to attain the optimum physical, emotional, individual to cleanse the spiritual heart (tazkiyat
intellectual, social and spiritual well-being and al-nafs) of those afore-mentioned diseases or
positive growth. By strengthening, enriching and ailments by cultivating the spiritual virtues as
refining the spiritual bond (īmān) with Allah (s. well as the spiritual needs of knowing the One
w. t.), the servant of Allah (s. w. t.) is directly and True God (ma‘rifat Allah), and practising true
individually
connected
with
his/her repentance (taubah), internalising the values of
Compassionate Creator and Caring Master. God-consciousness (taqwā), sincerity (ikhlāṣ),
Whenever he or she faces a personal problem of justice (‘adl), abstinence (zuhd), trust in God
mental well-being or other types of problems, the (tawakkul), gratitude to Allah (shukr), spiritual
direct and immediate spiritual connection with the intimacy with God (uns), love of God
spiritual
contentment
Compassionate Creator and Master must be (maḥabbatu’Llāh),
self-examination
(muḥāsabah),
utilised to the fullest, because it is only He who (qanā‘ah),
can solve the most difficult or complex problems contemplation (tafakkur) and remembrance of
faced by His servants or Believers, if they turn to Allah (dhikr), of death and the Hereafter. In this
Him with sincerity, certitude and absolute faith in connection the Believers learn from the Prophetic
Sunnah and the writings of well-known Islamic
His healing powers.
Bearing in mind that human life is full of spiritual scholars such as al-Ghazālī (d.1111)
trials, tribulations and problems, both The Qur’an how to control the bad influence of the carnal
and the Sunnah of Prophet Muhammad (s. a. w.) soul (nafs) or base desires (sing. hawā) in their
caution and remind Believers that the integrity hearts by means of “struggling to control the
and purity of Islamic spirituality should not be desires” (jihād al-nafs), overcoming the dangers
undermined, weakened, corrupted or destroyed and traps of worldly temptations (matā’ al-ḥayāt
and recognising the continuous
by
spiritual-moral
“diseases”
(amrāḍ), al-dunyā)
insinuations of the Devil/Satan (Shaiṭān) and the whisperings, evil suggestions (waswasah,
delusions of fleeting pleasures of worldly life hamazāt) and footsteps (khuṭuwāt) of Satanic
(ghurūr al-ḥayāt al-dunyā). The diseases of the forces (see al-Ghazālī 2007).
Notwithstanding the broad scope of
heart include polytheism, unbelief, hypocrisy,
insincerity, arrogance, pride, self-conceit, greed, human-human and human-nature relationships
miserliness, jealousy, rancour, envy, ostentation, serving as avenues of Islamic spirituality, the
craving for popularity, status and public praise, most important channels by which the Believers
love of wealth, and love of worldly pleasures. manifest their spirituality are the four “pillars of
Many of these diseases (or reprehensible Islam”, namely the five obligatory daily prayers
character traits) are the deep-rooted causes of (ṣalāh), the giving of the obligatory poor due or
ethical, social, economic, political and alms tax (zakat), fasting (ṣaum) in the month of
environmental injustices, evils, vices and crises Ramaḍān, and performance of pilgrimage to
in contemporary societies and civilisations. Makkah (ḥajj) once in a lifetime for those who
Therefore the scope of Islamic spirituality should are capable of doing so. In addition, in order to
not be confined only to the dimension of human- gain spiritual proximity (taqarrub ila’Llāh) to the
God relationship–involving the need for Compassionate and Merciful Sustainer, the pious
“purification of the soul”, nurturing of Believers perform many supererogatory acts
“praiseworthy morality” (akhlāq maḥmūdah) or (sunnah or nawāfil) of prayers, fasting,
good character traits (ḥusn al-khuluq) and getting performance of minor pilgrimage (‘umrah),
rid of “reprehensible morality” (akhlāq reading or memorisation of the Qur’an and lots
madhmūmah) or bad character traits (sū’ al- of charitable contributions of money, time,
khuluq) – but it should be extended to the knowledge, wisdom, skills, energy, etc. to

10 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

alleviate the needs, the sufferings and problems means that he or she is to enjoin all that is
of the underprivileged, the needy and the permissible (ḥalāl), good (khair) and virtuous
marginalised in society. These are additional (ma‘rūf) and to prohibit all that is bad (sharr) or
avenues by which the Believers actualise their reprehensible (munkar) or forbidden (ḥarām). In
spirituality (or condition of absolute faith in short, his/her spiritual-ethical duty is to promote
Allah, the Most Compassionate) thus bringing the public welfare or public good (maṣlaḥah) and
them closer and closer to Him. It is important for prevent that which is harmful (mafsadah) or
the Muslim or Muslimah to take note that injurious to society and the environment. In this
spiritual integrity and maturity in Islam is a way his/her way of life and developmental efforts
dynamic and continuous process of spiritual- will be in harmony with the five fundamental
moral development in a Muslim’s personality. objectives of the Divine Law (Maqāṣid alIslamic spirituality begins with a Muslim’s Sharī`ah) – the protection, preservation and
nominal submission (Islām) to Allah the Most growth of the Islamic Religion, Life, Intellect,
Compassionate, and rises through the states of Progeny and Wealth.
The contemporary Muslim community
faith and conviction (Īmān) in Him and His
teachings, followed by constant God-fearing throughout the world needs to be reminded that,
consciousness
(taqwā),
beneficence
and as a religious, spiritual and ethical community,
overflowing moral excellence and moral beauty the Muslim Ummah has been given the
(Iḥsān), and culminating in the state of love responsibility by Allah the Most Compassionate
(maḥabbah) of the Compassionate Master and of “enjoining all that is good and virtuous, and
Sustainer and yearning for His grace and pleasure prohibiting all that is bad and reprehensible” (The
(riḍwān) as well as for spiritual proximity to His Qur’an 3:104). The Muslim community is also
Final Messenger, Prophet Muḥammad (s. a. w.) charged by Allah (s. w. t.) to be “the best
community brought forth for mankind” (The
in this world and in the Hereafter.
We need to reiterate that, from the Qur’an, 3:110), and to be the Ummah Wasaṭ, the
worldview of the Qur’an, the material world is Middle-Most Community which upholds Justice,
not an evil place: it is a God-designated space- Moral Excellence and Balance between the two
time and God-given opportunity for human opposites of liberality on the one hand and
beings to live in, to work and strive (jihād) to extremism on the other (The Qur’an, 2:143-146).
serve Divine purposes. It is a temporary abode, With those qualities of excellence, the Muslim
no doubt, but it is a necessary abode in which a community is to play the role of Witnesses
human being is to develop into a good, righteous (shuhadā’) for the rest of mankind in terms of
and virtuous human (insān ṣāliḥ), to work implementing Allah’s commandments and
together with fellow human beings for a safe, injunctions.
As members of the divinely-mandated
peaceful and bountiful environment towards
establishing a virtuous society (Mujtama‘ ṣāliḥ) community with a sacred mission to enjoin what
and a virtuous civilisation (haḍārah ṣāliḥah), for is good and prohibit what is bad, the Believers
the ultimate goal of serving and worshipping are primarily motivated by their faith and
(‘ibādah) God sincerely, thereby earning His conviction in Allah (s. w. t.), in His Final
pleasure (riḍwān) and true success and wellbeing Messenger Muhammad (s .a. w.) and in life
Hereafter. It is part of their consciousness as
(al-falāḥ) in the Hereafter.
It is important to realise that spirituality in Believers also to anticipate that the world and the
the religion and civilisation of Islam is expressed whole universe will come to a cataclysmic end
by the Believer, not by rejecting or denying one day, at a time known only to the Creatormaterial wellbeing, but by living actively, Sustainer. Nevertheless, the true Believers look
righteously and peacefully, while being fully forward to and aspire, through their good deeds
engaged in the world as a God-obedient and God- in this worldly life, for the everlasting phase of
fearing servant and vicegerent who has been life in al-Ākhirah which provides conditions of
entrusted by his/her Creator-Sustainer to develop permanent bliss and happiness for those who
it in accordance with His commandments. This have succeeded in living a virtuous life of

11 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

The qalb can also turn towards the higher,
enhanced spiritual connection with and
submission to the Compassionate Creator- Godly nature of the Spirit (rūḥ) with acts of
Sustainer. The hearts of these Believers tremble obedience, taqwā character and remembrance of
and shudder at the prospect of having to live a Allah (dhikru’Llāh) and the Ākhirah. This will
future life of ignominy, terrible shame and utter result in increased positive emotional and moral
helplessness–devoid of Divine mercy and grace – characteristics (akhlāq maḥmūdah) of the
which will be the destiny of the rebellious and Believer. If he/she sustains the praiseworthy
arrogant worshippers of worldly glory, power and moral and spiritual qualities of a true Believer by
being steadfast (istiqāmah) with the virtues of
dominance.
taqwā, spiritual-moral excellence (iḥsān) and
3. The Islamic Conception of Man’s Soul In Brief
love and longing (maḥabbah) for Allah’s
A full Islamic understanding of the soul that pleasure, then it is highly likely that he/she would
explains the reality of its complex nature and the return to Allah (s. w. t.) on that Dreadful and
proper relationship of the four spiritual Awesome Day of Judgement “with a sound,
components of the soul, namely (i) rūḥ (spirit), healthy, and purified heart” (bi-qalb salīm, the
(ii) qalb (spiritual heart), (iii) ‘aql (intellect), and Qur’an, al-Shu`arā’ 26:87-89). This is one of the
(iv) nafs (lower self) can be read from al- major aspirations of a true Believer in Islam. The
Ghazālī’s Book of Knowledge (see al-Ghazālī, good news is that this level of spiritual elevation
2016) and Marvels of the Heart (see al-Ghazālī, and purification is attainable if the Believer obeys
2007).
and follows the injunctions and guidance of Allah
In The Qur’anic conception of man, every (s. w. t.) and His Messenger (s. a. w.), and knows
human being – Muslim or non-Muslim – has an how to avoid falling into the different deceptions
innately pure and good nature, fiṭrah, which (ghurūr) of this-worldly life, Satan and passion.
Allah (s. w. t.) has created. It is spiritually Hence the “striving against the lower self” (jihād
connected to its Creator but it can become al-nafs) is regarded in Islam as “the greater
clouded, covered over or forgotten as a result of jihād” in comparison to the physical or military
childhood upbringing, parental influence or struggle.
environmental factors. Spiritual and moral
The duty of cleaning and purifying the
corruption of the human self also suppresses the self (tazkiyat al-nafs) is a fundamental religious
positive impact of the inherent goodness of the duty of every adult Muslim. It involves a constant
fiṭrah. Allah (s. w. t.) reveals in the Qur’an that inner spiritual struggle of the self to overcome
the human soul originates from Him and that He the ailments in the heart, with constant acts of
has endowed it with the capacity for seeking forgiveness from Allah (s. w. t.), true
righteousness, piety and high spiritual elevation repentance to Him, and remembrance of Allah (s.
as well as the capacity for waywardness, w. t.) amidst the distractions of the dunyā. The
wickedness and deviation. But whoever takes aim is to liberate oneself from the downward pull
care to nourish, clean and purify the soul will of the “evil-inciting soul” (al-nafs al-ammārah),
gain true wellbeing and success (falāḥ), while the to be at least at the level of the “blaming soul”
one who allows it to be buried in darkness, soiled (al-nafs al-lawwāmah), and eventually – with
or corrupted, will be ruined (The Qur’an, 91:7- divine assistance – attain the level of the “the
10). At the centre of the self or personality is the tranquil soul” or “the soul at rest” (al-nafs alspiritual heart (qalb) which is the spiritual centre muṭma’innah) (The Qur’an, 89:27-28). In this
of the person. It has the potential to turn toward vital inner struggle, the intellect or reason (‘aql)
the lower impulses of the soul (nafs) due to the of the Believer has to play the positive role of
influences of this-worldly (dunyā) distractions or strengthening, supporting and protecting the qalb
temptations of Satan, resulting in increased from Satanic insinuations and misleading
symptoms
of
negative
emotions
or empirically or rationally acquired knowledge or
“blameworthy” (madhmūmah) characteristics, or information. The ‘aql of the Believer, according
what the Qur’an terms as “diseases” (amrāḍ) of to the Qur’an, is not a separate or independent
the qalb.
entity as understood in secular cultures: it is in

12 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

fact the cognitive function of the qalb which is and other-worldly value, which we Muslims and
not supposed to be disconnected from the fellow human beings need always to preserve,
foundation of Tawhidic faith. As such the ‘aql of protect and purify from all kinds of corrupting
a Believer is naturally illuminated and guided by elements, and remove all the “stains” or “rusts”
the light of Divine Truth and is nourished by of our bad deeds and bad influence of the lower
Divine Wisdom so that its divinely-connected self, the hawā and the al-nafs al-ammārah bi’sreasoning, contemplation or logical thinking sū’ that incites to disobedience against religious
would provide the much-needed solutions to norms and rules, immoral acts and evil deeds.
many problems in human life—solutions which Allah (s. w. t.) mentions in several verses of the
do not contradict revealed truths or Divine values Qur’an that human hearts are susceptible to
and norms, as is the case in contemporary secular spiritual diseases, or moral ailments, by saying:
humanistic civilisation. It is for this reason that “in their hearts is a disease” (The Qur’an, althe Qur’an exhorts human beings to use their Baqarah 2:10; al-Mā’idah 5:52; al-Anfāl 8:49;
reason, intellect and rational observation not only al-Muddaththir 74:31) and similar verses, which
to appreciate the teachings of Islam but also to have been analysed in many Sufi works. The
understand the mysteries in Allah’s creation and heart as a dynamic spiritual core of human
the universe. Islam also elevates the position of personality can therefore, according to the
God-fearing scholars (‘ulamā’) and “people who Qur’an, be “healthy” (al-Shu‘arā’ 26:88-89); be
possess sound reason” (Ulu’l-Albāb) because “tested” (al-Ḥujurāt 49:3); be “blind” (al-Ḥajj
they use the cognitive function of their spiritual 22:46); be “hard”, (al-Ḥajj 22:53); be “locked” or
hearts in the proper way as enjoined by the “full of rust” (al-Muṭaffifīn 83:14; al-Baqarah
2:7); “follow the whispers” of Satan (al-An’ām
Creator.
It is important, therefore, that we Muslims 6:113) or be “without understanding” (al-Anfāl
have a good understanding of the “hearts of the 8:24).
At this juncture, it is important to bear in
Believers” (“qulūb al-mu’minīn” in the Qur’an)
as opposed to the hearts of the hard-core mind that the ability to distinguish between what
materialists, the self-deluded hypocrites, the is ḥaqq (truth, real) or ma‘rūf (right, good,
arrogant disbelievers, the defiant atheists or the beneficial, acceptable) and bāṭil (false) or munkar
unrepentant sinners. The hearts of the Believers (wrong, bad, harmful, objectionable, rejected) is
are hearts, which are informed and guided by the an essential skill in the life of a Muslim. But what
knowledge and wisdom of the Qur’an and the makes it difficult sometimes to distinguish good
Sunnah.
These hearts inspire, motivate, from evil is when the lower self, the al-nafs alstrengthen and spur the Believers to greater ammārah bi-‘s-sū’ comes into play to blur the
heights of spiritual-ethical development and distinction or to weaken the positive influence of
progress, against the tide and forces of disbelief, the ‘aql. The lower self, which always instigates
polytheism, corruption, anarchy, depravity, the human being to commit evil deeds can easily
immorality, falsehood, nihilism, atheism, be exploited by Satan in his war against the
individualism, racism and secularism. It is these Believers and the forces of good. Knowing this
hearts (which include the intellects within them) unique nature of the qalb would help Muslim
which will help the Believers to overcome the educators, leaders and parents to give proper
problems of psychological disorders such as attention to the holistic growth, development and
depression, anxiety, worries, excessive anger, elevation of the qalb.
It is important to know, first, that Allah (s.
lack of self-esteem, paranoia, etc., which are
affecting more and more people in this era of w. t.) does not use the word ‘aql (intellect,
uncertainty, post-normal times and COVID-19 intelligence, reason) as a noun in The Qur’an,
although it exists in the Arabic language. Rather
pandemic.
The qalb as the Allah-gifted spiritual the All-Knowing, the All-Wise Creator-Sustainer
entity (al-Imām al-Ghazālī calls it “laṭīfah uses the verbs “ya‘qilūn” (they understand,
rabbāniyyah rūḥāniyyah”- a subtle spiritual comprehend or they reason), “na‘qilu” (we
entity of Divine origin) is of immense worldly understand, we use our reason) and “yafqahūn”

13 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

(they understand, comprehend) as actions and taqwā, the human mind knows and remembers its
functions of the qalb. The following two verses Compassionate Master and operates in
accordance with the will of the Master, like the
need to be studied carefully:
mind of the true scholars (‘ulamā’ with khasyah
“Have they not travelled through the earth, and – awe and fear – of Allah’s wrath and displeasure
have hearts [qulūb] by which they could (The Qur’an, 35:28) and the God-oriented mind
reason/gain wisdom or understanding [ya‘qilūn], of true Believers and the Ulu’l-Albāb (The
and ears by which they could hear? For indeed, Qur’an, 3:190-194). However, under the steady
it is not their eyes that have become blind but it is influence and dominance of secular education
the hearts [qulūb] that are in their breasts that and culture, secularised media and ICT, and
secularised science and technology of
have become blind!”
The Qur’an (22:46) contemporary secular humanistic civilisation, the
‘aql and thinking of many Muslim students,
“And certainly many are the invisible beings and academics, scholars, professionals, economists,
humans We have made for hell who have hearts politicians and national leaders have been
[qulūb] with which they understand not [lā uprooted from the anchor of īmān and taqwā and
yafqahūna bihā] (or fail to grasp the truth), and freed from Divine Guidance. The Muslim ‘aql
eyes with which they fail to see [la yubṣirūna then becomes a creature, which transgresses all
bihā], and ears with which they fail to hear [la divine and religious limits on human freedom. It
yasma‘ūna bihā]. They are like cattle - no, they is transformed into an independent source of
are [even] more misguided: it is they, they who relativistic or speculative knowledge, and serves
as an instrument of intellectual arrogance,
are the [truly] heedless [of warnings]!”
oppression,
dehumanisation,
The Qur’an (7:179) ostentation,
injustice, agnosticism, cynicism, nihilism and
The explanation given by Abdullah Yusuf Ali on relativism—these being some of the root causes
The Qur’anic meaning of qalb is most of contemporary problems of depression, anxiety,
enlightening. The word for heart [qalb] in Arabic despair, Islamophobia and meaninglessness
speech imports both the seat of intelligent among the younger generation of Muslims.
Under these circumstances, the ‘aql
faculties and understanding as well as the seat of
affections and emotions. Those who reject Allah's becomes impervious to the Divine Light of
Message may have their physical eyes and ears, wisdom and enlightenment, and the qalb in
but their hearts are blind and deaf. If their which the cognitive rational faculty resides
faculties of understanding were active, would becomes hardened. At this stage the qalb then
they not see the Signs of Allah’s Providence and deserves to be “sealed” as Allah (s. w. t.) says:
Allah's Wrath in nature around them and in the “Their hearts were stamped so they do not
cities and ruins if they travel intelligently? understand/comprehend” (The Qur’an, alTaubah 9:87; al-Munāfiqūn 63:3) and “Allah
(Abdullah Yusuf Ali n.d. 964)
On the Qur’anic verse al-A`rāf (7:174), stamped their hearts so they do not know (have
Abdullah Yusuf Ali says that “though they have knowledge)”.
The Qur’an (9:93)
apparently all the faculties of reason and
perception, they have so deadened them that
those faculties do not work, and they go headlong 4. The negative impact from the external force of
satanic Influences
into Hell. They are, as it were, made for Hell.”
Now we come to a very important matter related
(Abdullah Yusuf Ali n.d. 459).
We would like to add here, with regard to to the inner spiritual struggle of human beings to
maintenance of mental well-being, that one of the reach the goal of al-falāḥ or comprehensive and
five principal objectives of the Shari`ah is the holistic well-being, which is rarely discussed in
ḥifẓ (preservation, the protection and the mainstream intellectual discourses or mainstream
sustainability) of the sound ‘aql. With sound human development modules; i.e. the disruptive
reason being grounded upon true īmān and and deviationist role of an unseen “Perpetual

14 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

be quite O.K., they think, to “make hay
Virus” (like the Coronavirus) in human life,
while the sun shines”.
culture and civilisation coming from highly
conniving and persistent but invisible Forces of f. Inject into the mind and psyche of Muslims
the idea – later to become a firm conviction –
Evil, which have the ability to do, among other
that there is no need to worry too much about
things, the following:
the Hereafter; instead Muslims should
a. Camouflage or disguise what is munkar as
concentrate on achieving material progress in
ma‘rūf, failure as success, falsehood (bāṭil)
their worldly life so as to be on par, if not
as truth (ḥaqq), vice (radhīlah) as virtue
better, than the Western standards of living,
(faḍīlah), misery as blessing, poison as
by imitating or adopting their models,
honey, or divine wrath as divine pleasure;
systems or theories.
b. Convert the less educated Muslim masses or
confused Muslim youth, students or young
We know from the Qur’an and the Sunnah
professionals to believe in polytheistic
supernatural forces, or to become followers that Iblīs and Satan are capable of conjuring
of hedonism, nihilism, relativism, post- much more lethal, yet subtle, techniques or
stratagems to lead Muslims and others astray
modernism, neo-liberalism or neo-atheism;
c. Lead Muslim traditional rulers, political from the path of the true Believers, the path that
leaders
(including
Prime
ministers, would lead to true goodness and well-being
Ministers, and Members of Parliament), conditions in the world and true happiness in the
policy makers, business and industry players, Hereafter. Adult Muslims, including religious
senior civil servants, law enforcement scholars, intellectuals and students can certainly
(including the judiciary) and immigration learn more about the subtle techniques of Satan
officers, to be involved in practices of from the chapter on “Condemnation of
cheating, fraud, scandalous deals, corruption Deception” (Dhamm al-Ghurūr in Book 3) of alof all kinds, abuse of authority, cronyism, Ghazālī’s Iḥyā’ `Ulūm al-Dīn in order to be
better prepared to avert the deadly spiritual
collusion, favouritism and cronyism.
d. Make Muslims believe that since Allah (s. w. diseases of pride and arrogance, desire for human
t.) is All-Merciful and All-Forgiving, adoration or appreciation, and the deadliest
Muslims can afford to indulge in some kinds disease in the form of self-admiration or conceit
of munkar or sinful acts, because they would (‘ujb), which is considered to be a form of hidden
eventually
be
forgiven
by
their shirk – associating things other than Allah (s. w.
Compassionate and Merciful Master. They t.) as an object of worship.
The avowed aim of the Iblis and Satan is
could also plan to perform Ḥajj or `Umrah in
the distant future when they would make the to take all human beings, if they could, along
necessary taubah (repentance) sincerely with with them onto the outwardly attractive,
all their hearts, and seek forgiveness most of appealing and seductive trajectories of human,
the time while performing pilgrimage, as a societal or civilisational development which are
Ḥajj that is accepted (mabrūr) by Allah (s. designed to lead humans into the deep chasms of
miseries in life on earth and life after death.
w. t.) would absolve them of all their sins.
e. Instil and develop in young Muslim Therefore, we need to study and understand
personalities or middle-age professionals or profoundly some relevant verses of the Qur’an
government servants, the popular Malay regarding our antagonistic relationship with the
expression of “tidak apa” “ok lah”, thus unseen evil force. Allah (s. w. t.) declares that
reflecting the attitudes or mindsets of Satan is an ‘Aduwwun Mubīn (an Obvious
complacency,
laxity,
mediocrity, Enemy) in the following verse:
irresponsibility as well as the tendency to
procrastinate or to defer doing good deeds, “O mankind! Partake of what is lawful and good
including acts of seeking divine forgiveness on earth, and follow not Satan's footsteps: for,
(istighfār), taubah or Ḥajj to a much later verily, he is your obvious enemy [‘aduwwun
date in one’s life. In the meantime, it should mubīn] and he bids you only to do evil, and to

15 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

commit deeds of abomination, and to attribute Your straight path. Then I shall most certainly
unto God something of which you have no fall upon them from before them and from behind
them [openly as well as in a manner beyond their
knowledge.”
The Qur’an (2:168-169) ability to understand], and from their right and
from their left: and You will not find most of them
Let us now look at those verses, which grateful to [You]”
The Qur’an (7:13-17)
reveal: (a) the historical background of the fatal
disobedient act of Iblīs which prompted him to
However, Allah (s. w. t.) assures that
plan for the vindictive spiritual destruction of the
“Indeed, you shall have no power over My
human species until the Day of Resurrection, and
creatures - unless it be those who are [already]
(b) what he and his armies have decided to do to
lost in grievous error and follow you [of their
spread their mischievous influence among
own will]”
mankind with the permission given by Allah (s.
The Qur’an (15:42)
w. t.) and (c) what Allah (s. w. t.) had said upon
hearing the evil strategies proposed by Iblīs:
This means that although Allah (s. w. t.)
has given the permission to Iblīs and his army to
“And We have certainly created you [O
tempt human beings and cause havoc in intermankind] and given you [human] form. Then We
human relations, they would have no power to
said unto the angels, “Prostrate yourselves
seduce those who are truly conscious of God. It
before Adam!” - whereupon they [all] prostrated
would also appear from Allah’s responses in the
themselves, except for Iblis: he was not of those
dialogue that despite Iblīs’s ostensible rebellion
who prostrated.”
against his Creator, he and Shaiṭān would play a
The Qur’an (7:11)
role of “the eternal tempter who enables man to
exercise his God-given freedom of choice
“[And God] said: “What has prevented you from
between good and evil and, thus, to become a
prostrating when I commanded you?” Answered
being endowed with moral free will”
[Iblis]: “I am better than he: You have created
(Muhammad Asad 2011: 463).
me out of fire, whereas You have created him out
of clay.”
[And God] said: "Go out from here, disgraced
The Qur’an (7:12)
and disowned! [And] as for those among them
who follow you - I will most certainly fill hell
As stated further in the Qur’an:
with all of you!
The Qur’an (7:11-18)
“[Iblis said]: Tell me, is this [foolish being,
Adam] the one whom You have exalted above
The Qur’an provides an additional statement by
me? Indeed, if You will but allow me a respite till
Allah (s. w. t.):
the Day of Resurrection, I shall most certainly
cause his descendants - all but a few - to obey me
[God said] Entice, then, with your voice such of
blindly!”
them as you can, and bear upon them with all
The Qur’an (17:62)
your horses and all your men, and be their
partner in [all sins relating to] worldly goods
[God] said: “Descend then from this [Paradise]
and children, and hold out [all kinds of] promises
- for it is not for you to show arrogance here! So
to them: and [they will not know that] whatever
go out, then: indeed, you are of the debased!"
Satan promises them is but meant to delude the
[Iblis] said: "Grant me a respite till the Day
mind.
when all shall be raised from the dead." [And
The Qur’an (17:64)
God] replied: "Indeed you shall be among those
who are granted a respite." [Whereupon Iblis]
Allah (s. w. t.) gives His assurance by saying:
said: "Now that You have sent me astray, I shall
“[And yet,] behold, you shalt have no power over
most certainly lie in ambush for them all along
[such of] My servants [as place their trust in
16 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

Me]: for none is as worthy of trust as thy gates to the heart of man. Those organs are the
Sustainer.”
(1) tongue; (2) eyes; (3) ears; (4) hands; (5)
The Qur’an (17:65) private parts; (6) stomach; and (7) feet. But there
are eleven major invisible inner gates of the heart
In another verse Iblīs openly reveals, at this point, by which Satan gains deeper penetration into the
his mischievous plan:
soul of human beings to corrupt and create
diseases in it. Those major non-material gates
I shall indeed make [all that is evil] on earth are: (1) anger and appetence; (2) envy (ḥasad)
seem goodly to them, and shall most certainly and greed (ḥirṣ); (3) satiety (shaba’) of food; (4)
beguile them - into grievous error.
love of material adornment; (5) covetous desire
The Qur’an (15:39) (ṭama‘); (6) haste and lacking steadfastness; (7)
love of material wealth and possessions; (8)
But, Iblīs did mention an exception as follows:
stinginess and fear of poverty; (9) sectarian and
partisan prejudices; 10) inducing the common
“[I will beguile all], except those among them, people to indulge in abstract theological issues
who are your sincere servants!"
about the essence and attributes of God; (11)
The Qur’an (15:40) thinking ill of other Muslims (sū’ al-ẓann bi’Meaning that there would be, among muslimīn). Al-Ghazālī says that the way to
human beings, “those who are so deeply overcome these personal shortcomings is to close
conscious of Allah (s. w. t.) that no ‘blandishment the gates by cleaning the heart and through the
of Satan’ can lead them astray”. Muhammad constant remembrance of Allah (s. w. t.), (alAsad 2011: 462). In order to know more about Ghazālī 2007: 122-123).
this ever-present, pervasive and spirituallyethically destructive influences of the stratagems 5. Islamic spiritual means of addressing
psychological disorders
of Iblīs and Satan, it would be useful for leaders
In
overcoming
some cases of psychological
of the Muslim community to be able to benefit
from the insights and wisdom of our foremost disorders, Muslims are taught to seek divine
spiritual masters and savants, such as al-Imām al- assistance from the Compassionate Creator,
Ghazālī (1058/1059-1111 C.E.) particularly in his Omnipotent Master and Beneficent Sustainer,
Min ‘ajā’ib al-Qalb (Wonders of the Heart), in because He alone has the power to solve all
which he describes in detail the eleven great human problems. Believers are being advised by
gates or doors through which Satan enters the the Compassionate Sustainer to seek help from
qalb of human beings (al-Ghazālī 2007: 106- Him by means of internalising the virtue of
135); Ibn Qayyim al-Jauziyyah (1292–1350 C.E.) patience and perseverance (ṣabr) and the channel
in his Ighāthat al-Lahfān min Maṣā’id al-Shaiṭān of direct communion and communication with
(Aid for the Yearning One in Resisting Satan; Him via prayer (al-ṣalāh) and supplication. Allah
and in Talbīs Iblīs (Deceit of Iblīs) of Ibn al-Jauzī (s. w. t.) has given this great advice to all His
(1116-1201 C.E.). They have taken great pains believing servants, because He is with those who
to write important ground-breaking treatises to persevere with self-restraint, patience and sincere
educate Muslims masses as well as scholars on prayer to Him alone:
the lures, seductions, delusions, deceptions, traps
and machinations, manufactured by Satans to “O you who do believe! Seek help and assistance
deceive all kinds of human beings, in order to (in your affairs) from sabr (patience,
distance them from obedience to Allah (s. w. t.) perseverance, self-restraint and constancy) and
and make them sin against God or become their from prayer, for surely Allah is with those who
have patience and perseverence.”
followers or slaves.
The Qur’an (2:153)
Al-Ghazālī (2007: 106-135) states that
there are seven physical organs of the body,
which are capable of becoming tools for
generation sinful acts that serve as the external

17 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

Allah (s. w. t.) Himself urges human beings to the Master-Creator. He assures the believing
make supplications to Him and He would servants that He is always with (ma‘iyyah) the
respond accordingly:
patient and perseverant servants, with the Godfearing (muttaqūn) and the benevolent servants
“O Muhammad), when My servants ask you (muḥsinūn).
about Me, tell them I am quite near; I hear and
answer the call of the caller whenever he calls 5.1 Taqwā
Me. Let them listen to My call and believe in It is remarkable that the virtue of taqwā in the
Me; perhaps they will be guided aright.”
personality of a Muslim or Muslimah would
The Qur’an (2:186)
produce solutions to different kinds of interpersonal problems in the life of Muslims. The
“And your Lord says, "Call upon Me; I will Rayan Institute has summarised in a very
respond to you." Indeed, those who disdain My attractive way the wonderful consequences of
worship
will
enter
Hell
[rendered] taqwā in the following ways:
contemptible.”
i. Ease in matters
The Qur’an (40:60)
“And whoever fears Allah, He will make
Allah (s. w. t.) reveals to all human beings for him ease in his matter.”
The Qur’an (65:4)
that Allah waits for anyone to call upon Him in
order to respond positively at a particular time at
Whoever has taqwā, Allah makes matters easy
night. Abu Huraira narrated: The Messenger of
for him in this world as well as the next. This
Allah, peace and blessings be upon him, said:
does not necessarily mean that the person will not
“Our Lord descends to the lowest heaven in the
face difficulty, but through the blessings of his
last third of every night, and He says: Who is
taqwā, he is guaranteed ease and the strength to
calling upon Me that I may answer him? Who is
bear these difficulties without losing faith or
asking from Me that I may give him? Who is
hope.
seeking My forgiveness that I may forgive
him?”(Reported by both al-Bukhārī and Muslim).
ii. A way out of problems and difficulties

The Prophet (s. a. w.) has also said: “There is
no disease that Allah has created, except that He
also has created its treatment (reported by alBukhari, Book 71).

“And whoever fears Allah, He will make for
him a way out.”
The Qur’an (65:2)

Taqwā serves as a divine guard against trials of
When a Muslim acquires – through the spiritual this world as well as the difficulties of the
connection with the Compassionate Master – the hereafter. We see an example of this in the
attributes of Believers and develops those Qur’an where, in the story of Khidr
attributes into habits of the heart, he/she will be (‘alaihissalam), it was the righteous nature of the
able to get the spiritual, moral or emotional father that saved his sons from loss even after his
nourishment his/her soul needs from the Caring death. The Qur’an says:
Master. This is so, because the Master promises
in many verses of The Qur’an that He would be “As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys
with the true Believers and bestow him/her the in the town; and there was under it a treasure
kind of knowledge and skills he/she requires to belonging to them; and their father was a
overcome any personal problems or challenges in righteous man, and their Lord intended that they
life, including psychological and psychospiritual should attain their age of full strength and take
ones. The Compassionate Master has promised, out their treasure as a mercy from your Lord.”
in no uncertain terms in The Qur’an, that He will
The Qur’an (18:82)
surely assist the Believers who possess true faith
(īmān) and God-fearing (taqwā) qualities in ways
that could never be provided by other creatures of
18 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

from Allah, which are specifically focused
towards the hearts of the true believers. People
“And He will provide for him from sources seek solace in material items, sports, relationships
and some even seek it in sin and vice, whereas
he could never imagine.”
The Qur’an (65:3) the true solace that the heart craves can only be
acquired from The Creator of the heart Himself.
The Almighty Allah is the Creator, When a servant attaches his heart, actions,
Sustainer and Nourisher of the universe. longings and aspirations to Allah (s. w. t.), The
Whatever a person requires and desires of Almighty sees to his affairs and keeps him in a
sustenance can be found in His vast state of peace which even those with abundant
treasures. The divine promise is that the worldly wealth envy.
God-fearing will be sustained from sources
they would never perceive to receive “Those who believed and whose hearts are
sustenance from. The Noble Qur’an assured by the remembrance of Allah.
Unquestionably, by the remembrance of
reiterates this in another verse:
Allah hearts are assured.”
The Qur’an (13:28)
And if the people of the towns believed
and had Taqwa, certainly We should have
opened for them blessings from the Besides the above benefits of adopting taqwā,
The Lord of great bounty has more long term
heavens and the earth.
The Qur’an (7:96) benefits in store for the righteous believers. The
high status of the people of taqwā is mentioned in
iv. Ability to distinguish truth from falsehood various verses of the Qur’an, one of which will
“O you who believe! If you fear Allah, suffice for all.
He will grant you a criterion (furqan).” “For those who have taqwā there is
The Qur’an (8:29) Triumph (Paradise).”
The Qur’an (78:31)

iii. Unexpected sustenance

When a believer sees to it that his obedience
to Allah and love for him stay above
everything else, he is gifted by Allah with
furqān (such insight that leaves no doubt
between truth and falsehood). Every matter
becomes clear in his mind and when he is
faced with confusing situations of the heart,
he will be guided to the light. The Qur’an,
terms the day of the Battle of Badr as
“Yawm-al-Furqān” (the Day of Distinction).
This was a decisive day in the history of
Islam, which proved that no enemy can
destroy a people who have the support of
Allah and such individuals will be successful
in all missions they undertake.

A frequent supplication of the Messenger of
Allah was: “O Allah! Instil righteousness in my
soul, and purify it as You are the best to purify it,
You are its Guardian and Protecting Friend.”
(Muslim)
(Rayyan
Institute,
2018,
https://rayyaninstitute.com/5-benefits-ofadopting-taqwa/).

Another observation on the conditionalities of
efficacious taqwā is worth quoting: taqwā
requires constant work, a constant state of
awareness of your actions and rectification of any
lapses. Taqwā forms the waypoints on the
journey towards Allah (s. w. t.). It is through
v. Tranquility
moving up the ranks of taqwā that one moves
“It is He (Allah) who sent down tranquillity
closer to Allah (s. w. t.). You move up through
into the hearts of the believers.”
The Qur’an (48:4) these waypoints by the way of zuhud, doing away
with the pleasures of this world. One at a time,
Calmness and tranquillity are sought after states taqwa isn't a static state but it's an upward battle
in the daily rat-race of life. These are bounties where you progressed through different states.
19 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

You begin with abandoning the major sins, then psychological or spiritual disorders. The Prophet
you move to abandoning the minor sins and you (s. a. w.) recommended that Believers should
keep progressing in your taqwa until you reach supplicate Allah (s. w. t.) with the du‘ā’ of
Prophet Ayyūb (a. s.) who was afflicted with
the state of the awliya where your needs and
severe disease and poverty, when he called out to
desires are completely aligned with those of Allah (s. w. t.) “Indeed, adversity has touched me
Allah (s. w. t.). (Reddit.com, 2018; and you are the Most Merciful of the merciful”,
https://www.reddit.com/r/islam/comments/7d7w or the du‘ā’ of Prophet Yunus (Jonah) when he
mc/and_whosoever_has_taqwa_of_allah_(s.w.t.) was in the stomach of the sea creature that
swallowed him:
_he_will_make).
Dr Zohair Abdul-Rahman explains in an article ...But he cried through the depths of darkness,
“There is no one worthy of worship but You.
on the importance of spiritual intelligence that:
The Islamic spiritual tradition contains a wide Glory be unto You, indeed I have been among the
variety of practices and beliefs that can be wrongdoers.”
The Qur’an (21:87)
analysed for therapeutic benefit. Rather than
presenting a comprehensive overview, we have
One of the most popular du‘ā’s taught by the
elected to focus on one prescribed [Prophetic]
Prophet (s. a. w.) for people facing serious
practice for anxiety and depressive symptoms: a
emotional, physical, mental or psychological
specific du‘ā’ (prayer) designed to ward off
disorders is the following: “O Allah! I seek
anxiety and depression. Whoever is afflicted with
refuge with You from worry and grief, I seek
grief or anxiety, and then he should supplicate
refuge in You from incapacity and laziness, I seek
with these [Prophetic] words: “Oh Allāh,
refuge in You from cowardice and miserliness, I
certainly I am your slave, the son of your male
seek refuge in You from being heavily in debt and
slave and the son of your female slave. My
from being overpowered by (other) men.”
forehead is in Your Hand. Your Judgment upon
me is assured and Your Decree concerning me is
As for the importance of dhikru’llāh as a
just. I ask You by every Name that you have means of overcoming personal problems of all
named Yourself with, revealed in Your Book, kinds, they are too numerous to be listed here.
taught any one of Your creation or kept unto Suffice it to say that it is the quality of the qalb
Yourself in the knowledge of the unseen that is and conduct that Allah (s. w. t.) looks at in
with You, to make the Qurān the spring of my considering His appropriate response. It is not
heart, and the light of my chest, the banisher of the quantity of dhikr, du‘ā’, ṣalāh and munājāt
my sadness and the reliever of my distress’; that matters to Allah (s. w. t.) It is the degree or
(Musnad Imam Ahmad Sahih in Zohair Abdul- depth of the Believers’ sincerity, honesty,
Rahman, 2017).
transparency, steadfastness, optimism and
reliance upon Allah (s. w. t.) and conformity to
He mentions further that: “the second category of the Sunnah of the Prophet (s. a. w.) which is the
diseases of the heart is based on emotional states determinant factor in the sight of Allah (s. w. t.)
such as anxiety, sadness, depression, and anger. as the True Healer (al-Shāfī) of all ailments, True
This type of disease can be treated naturally by Remover and Most Powerful Eradicator of all
treating the cause or with medicine that goes worries, anxiety, depression, sadness, pain,
against the cause…And this is because the heart sufferings, persecutions, calamities, turmoils,
is harmed by what harms the body and vice oppressions, jealousies, hatreds, rancour, greed,
versa.” (Zohair Abdul-Rahman 2017).
egoism, subjugations, manipulations, enmities
and injustices.
5.2 Du‘ā’ and dhikru’l lāh as psychotherapy
Allah (s. w. t.) has emphasised the
There are many supplications practised and importance of al-ṣabr and al-ṣalāh as spiritual
taught by Prophet Muhammad (s. a. w.) which means of overcoming all kinds existential
are
effective
in
overcoming
personal, problems, including psychological disorders.

20 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

The Prophet (s. a. w.) highly recommends that
Believers communicate and have spiritual
communion with Allah (s. w. t.) during the period
of Tahajjud prayers and at the time of saḥūr
(later part of the night before dawn of the day):
“Men/women who are steadfast, truthful,
obedient, spend (in the way of Allah) and
implore the forgiveness of Allah before
daybreak.”
The Qur’an (3:17)

the disease either. These destructive
maladies (muhlikāt) can destroy those
scholars who do not have the fear of Allah’s
displeasure and wrath in their hearts. Hence
the need to constantly strive to purify the
soul or cleanse the spiritual heart to remove
the poisonous qualities or toxic elements,
which are hidden from human eyes, but not
at all concealed from the sight and
knowledge of Allah Most Gracious.
f. Some of the relevant verses of the Qur’an
are:

Conclusion
Islamic spiritual perspective of psychological “Every soul shall have a taste of death: And
disorders and mental well-being is based on the only on the Day of Judgment shall you be paid
following metaphysical premises:
your full recompense. Only he who is saved far
a. The conception of human beings as spiritual- from the Fire and admitted to the Garden will
moral beings, with purity of fiṭrah and rūḥ have attained the object (of Life): For the life of
from Allah (s. w. t.) and the necessity to this world is but goods and chattels of
cleanse and purify the qalb, the ‘aql and the deception.”
nafs, with special attention to curbing and
The Qur’an (3:185)
conquering the hawā (passion).
b. When human beings acquire sound īmān, “The life of this world is nothing but a sport and
‘amal ṣāliḥ, taqwā and iḥsān, then Allah (s. a pastime, and the life of the Hereafter is far
w. t.) ensures for them ḥayāh ṭayyibah (the better for those who seek to ward off their ruin.
good life). If not there will be khusrān (true Will you not, then, understand?”
loss and misery) and ‘adhāb (punishment
The Qur’an (6:32)
from Allah (s. w. t.).
c. If human beings choose to follow his/her “Know that the life of this world is only play, and
base desires (ittibā’ al-hawā), or choose a idle talk, and adornment, and boasting among
lifestyle that defies the reminders and advice you, and rivalry in increase of wealth and
of Allah S.W.T, thus contracting many children.
like the example of rain whose
diseases of qalb and corruption of ‘aql, kufr (resulting) vegetation pleases the tillers, then it
al-ni‘mah, (ingratitude with regard to divine dries, then you see it turn yellow, then it becomes
bounties), ghaflah (heedlessness), then Allah straw. And in the hereafter is severe punishment,
(s. w. t.) promises a life of stressful existence and forgiveness from Allah, and (His) good
(ma‘īshah ḍankā) without inner peace or pleasure. And this-worldly life is nothing but a
tranquillity even if they may be financially or deceiving enjoyment.”
materially affluent.
The Qur’an (57:20)
d. Corruption and imbalance of nafs, qalb, ‘aql,
In conclusion, we would like to explain that
rūḥ plus the negative impact of hawā,
our
paper has emphasised the importance of
waswasah al-shaiṭān, ghurūr al-ḥayāt alovercoming
psycho-spiritual disorders by (i)
dunyā are the spiritual roots of
psychological disorders and mental well- strengthening the spiritual and ethical
foundations of the human self and personality,
being problems.
e. Understanding the Qur’anic concept of (ii) restoring the bond with the Creator and
ghurūr (deception, self-delusion, illusion) Sustainer of all that exists, and (iii) instilling the
and being vigilant against it is an important worldview of The Qur’an in one’s lives. We are
preventive measure. Ghurūr abounds in this- not suggesting that all psychological disorders,
depression,
anxiety,
fear
or
worldly life and scholars are not spared of including
schizophrenia or substance abuse should be or
21 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

Contemporary Psychological Disorders and the Spiritual Therapy from the Qur’an and the Sunnah / M.K Hassan

could be solved only by spiritual-ethical therapy Al-Ghazālī (2016). Kitab al-‘ilm the book of
or approaches. We recognise that some
knowledge
(tr.
Kenneth
Honerkamp).
psychological disorders have their causes in
Louisville: Fons Vitae.
social, inter-personal or biological or emotional Al-Ghazālī (2007). Wonders of the heart (tr.
Walter James Skellie). Kuala Lumpur: Islamic
factors. In such cases, we would recommend that
those suffering from such symptoms first seek
Book Trust.
proper attention from medical, psychiatric or Keshavaezi, H. (2018). “Islamic perspectives on
counselling experts who would address the
psychological and spiritual well-being and
underlying causes and provide appropriate
treatment”.
In
Moffic,
H.S., Peteet,
J.R., Hankir, A., Awaad, R. (Eds.) (2018).
treatment.
However, as Muslims, the patients should
Islamophobia and Psychiatry. Switzerland:
Springer Press.
also seek divine assistance or Islamic spiritual or
remedies, which would complement the medical No Author, (2018). “5 Benefits of adopting
or counselling solutions, without forgetting that
taqwā”. Rayyan Institute. (2018). Retrieved
November
11,
2020,
from
the mainstream secular-based medical and
psychological practices have their limitations as
https://rayyaninstitute.com/5-benefits-ofwell as shortcomings, if not negative side-effects.
adopting-taqwa/.
The reliance on anti-depressant drugs such as No Author, (2018). “And whosoever has Taqwa
of Allah (s. w. t. ), He will make a way for him
Prozac and Sarafem, or the use of drugs such as
Methadone to counter the symptoms of substance
to get out. And He will provide him from
abuse is one such limitation. The Islamic
where he never could imagine. And whoever
approach, it should be noted, is holistic but it
relies upon Allah - then He is sufficient for
does not preclude proper medical or psychiatric
him.”
Reddit.com.
(2018).
Retrieved
treatment for certain symptoms or ailments. The
November
11,
2020,
from”
Islamic approach is not limited to the biological
https://www.reddit.com/r/islam/comments/7d7
or social dimensions of mental distress; it goes
wmc/and_whosoever_has_taqwa_of_allah_(S.
beyond the material, the biological, the emotional
W. T.)_he_will_make.
and the social causes. It seeks a complete and Ibn Qayyim al-Jauziyyah (1292–1350 C.E.),
holistic solution by understanding the underlying
Ighāthat al-Lahfān min Maṣā’id al-Shaiṭān
spiritual roots or ailments of human
(Aid for the Yearning One in Resisting Satan).
psychological distress or mental disorders with Ibn al-Jauzī, Talbīs Iblīs (Deceit of Iblīs)
the aim to bring about lasting as well as sound
psychological growth of human beings, knowing Article History
that human beings are essentially spiritual and Received: 30-05-2021
Accepted: 18-06-2021
moral beings created by God.
•

The content of this paper has been presented, as a plenary speech,

References
at the 3rd session of the World Congress on Integration and
Abdul-Rahman, Z. (2017). “Islamic spirituality Islamicisation of Human Acquired Knowledge: Mental Health
and Well-being in the 4th Industrial Revolution’. Organized by
and mental well being”. Yaqeen Institute, IIUM, held at IIUM Kuantan Campus, June 4-6, June, 2021.
2017. Retrieved May 1, 2021 from
https://yaqeeninstitute.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/03/Islamic-Spiritualityand-Mental-Well-Being-revised.pdf.
Ali, A.Y. (n.d.). The Holy Qur’an. Madinah alMunawwarah: The Presidency of Islamic
Researches, IFTA.
Asad, Muhammad (2011). The Message of the
Qur’an. Kuala Lumpur: Islamic Book Trust.

22 | Revelation and Science / Vol. 11, No. 01 (1442H/2021)

